## Observational vs Experimental Studies

In most research questions or investigations, we are interested in finding an association that is causal (scenario 1 above). For example, "Is the COVID-19 vaccine effective?" is a causal question. The researcher is looking for an association between receiving the COVID-19 vaccine and catching COVID-19, but more specifically wants to show that the vaccine is the cause of reduction in probability of catching COVID-19. 

### Experimental Studies
There are 3 necessary and sufficient conditions [^***] to show that a variable X (for example vaccine) causes an outcome Y (such as not catching COVID-19). 
1. Temporal Precedence: We must show that X (the cause) happened before Y (the effect).
2. Non-spuriousness: We must show that the effect Y was not seen by chance.
3. No alternate cause: We must show that no other variable accounts for the relationship between X and Y.

The best way to show all three necessary and sufficient conditions, is by conducting an **experiment**. Experiments involve controllable factors which are measured and determined by the experimenter, uncontrollable factors which are measured but not determined by the experimentor, and experimental variability or noise which is unmeasured and uncontrolled. Controllable factors that the experimenter manipulates in his or her experiment are known as independent variables. In our vaccination example, the indpendent variable is receipt of vaccine. Uncontrollable factors that are hypothesized to depend on the independent variable are known as dependent variables. The dependent variable in the vaccination example is whether patients catch COVID-19. The experimentor cannot control whether participants catch the disease, but can measure whether or not they do, and it is hypothesized that catching the disease is dependent on vaccination status.

When conducting an experiment, it is important to have a comparison or **control group**. The control group is used to better understand the effect of the independent variable. For example, if all patients are given the vaccine, it would be impossible to measure whether the vaccine is effective as we would not know what would have happened if patients had not receive the vaccine. In order to measure the effect of the vaccine, the researcher must compare incidence rate of COVID-19 in patients that did not receive the vaccine to that of patients that did receive the vaccine. This comparison group of patients who did not receive the vaccine is the control group for the experiment. The control group allows the researcher to view an effect or association. When scientists say that the COVID-19 vaccine is 95% effective, this does not mean that only 5% of people who got the vaccine in their study caught COVID-19. That would not take into account the incidence rate of COVID-19 for those without a vaccine. Rather, 95% effective refers to having 95% lower incidence rate *compared to the control group.* Say Chicago has an incidence rate of 25% and a population of almost 3000000. Without the vaccine 750000 patients would be expected to catch COVID-19. If everyone was vaccinated the number expected to catch COVID-19 would drop to 37500, only 1.25% of the population. This is a large reduction! However, it is important that the researcher show that this effect is non-spurious and therefore important/significant. One way to do this is through **replication**, applying a treatment independently across two or more experimental subjects. In our example, the researcher may conduct the experiment on multiple patients or repeat the experiment for multiple groups of patients to show that the effect can be seen reliably. 

Now that the researcher has seen an association with temporal precedence by design and shown that it is non-spurious, they must be able to show there is no alternate cause for the association in order to prove causality. This can be done through **randomization**, random assignment of treatment to experimental subjects. Consider, a group of patients where all male patients are given the treatment and all female patients are in the control group. If an association is found, it would be unclear whether this association is due to the treatment or the fact that the groups were of differing sex. By randomizing experimental subjects to groups, researchers ensure there is no systematic difference between groups other than the treatment and therefore no alternate cause for the relationship between treatment and outcome. Another way of ensuring there is no alternate cause is by **blocking** or grouping similar experimental units together and assigning different treatments within such groups. Blocking is a way of dealing with sources of variability that are not of primary interest to the experimenter. In our vaccine example, the researcher may block on sex by grouping males together and females together and assigning treatments and controls within the different groups. Best practices are to block the largest and most salient sources of variability and randomize what is difficult or impossible to block. In our example blocking would account for variability introduced by sex whereas randomization would account for factors of variablity such as age or medical history which are more difficult to block.

### Observational Studies
Randomized experiments are considered the "Gold Standard" for showing a causal relationship. However, it is not always ethical or feasible to conduct a randomized experiment. Consider the following research question: Does living in Northern Chicago increase life expectancy? It would be infeasible to conduct an experiment which randomly allocates people to live in different parts of the city. Therefore, we must turn to observational data to test this question. Where experiments involve one or more factors/variables controlled by the experimentor (dose of a drug for example), in **observational studies** there is no effort or intention to manipulate or control the object of study. Researchers collect the data without interfering with the subjects. For example, researchers may conduct a survey gathering both health and neighborhood data or they may have access to administrative data from a local hospital. In these cases, the researchers are merely *observing* variables and outcomes.

There are two types of observational studies: retrospective studies and prospective studies. In a **retrospective study**, data is collected after events have taken place. This may be through surveys, historical data, or administrative records. An example of a retrospective study would be using administrative data from a hospital to study incidence of disease. In contrast, a **prospective study** identifies subjects beforehand and collects data as events unfold. For example, one might use a prospective study to study how personality traits develop in children by following a predetermined set of children through elementary school and giving them personality assessments each year.

[^***]: Necessary conditions must be met for the outcome of interest to occur. In this case, all 3 conditions must be met for the association to be causal. Sufficient conditions are conditions that, when met, produce the outcome of interest. In this case, meeting all three conditions makes the association causal.